---
title: "About"
layout: photo
bg: red #defined in _config.yml, can use html color like '#010101'
color: white  #text color
style: left
---
#About

The Rivercity Steel Band is a community steel band playing Caribbean style music. We aim to:

* Provide opportunities for people to learn music and to be part of a band.
* Promote the incredible and unique musical phenomenon of Steel Bands, as well as Caribbean culture.
* Learn and perform Steel Band music.

Membership is open to people of all ages from all walks of life and musical ability. There is no need to be able to read music and tuition is provided. The band performs regularly at various locations around Southeast Queensland including Brisbane City Council parks, CBD locations, local markets, festivals school events, Queensland Multicultural Festival and the Ipswich Festival. We rehearse as [West End State School](https://www.google.com.au/maps/place/West+End+State+School/@-27.4796023,153.0080617,17z/data=!3m1!4b1!4m2!3m1!1s0x6b9150a231dbe3f7:0x12ab0e3a02230667), every tuesday 6pm to 8pm.

Member fees are kept low in order to attract people from the community, especially those with disadvantage, which is traditionally the target membership of steel bands both in Trinidad and elsewhere in the world. Being a member of a steel band is a discipline which provides a rewarding sense of fulfillment and achievement, and a sense of belonging both to the band and to the wider, tight knit pan playing community.

The origin of steel bands lies in Trinidad where the discovery that oil drums could be hammered and tuned to make musical instruments was made. The basic instrument is the steel pan, or drum, which is made in a range of different sizes to match the range of notes of the instruments of an orchestra. Formerly associated with poverty, the steel pan is now officially recognised as the National Instrument of Trinidad and Tobago and has millions of players and followers throughout the world.

Steel pan music was introduced to Australia in the 1970s when Amral Khan’s Cavaliers Steel Bands toured the world and made several visits to Australia. A number of its members decided to stay, including Alvin Rostant, who later teamed up with Paul Santiago and formed the [Australian Academy of Steel Drums](www.steeldrums.org).

The Rivercity Steel Band evolved from one of the Academy’s workshops and was formed in 2008. Alvin is music director and brings a wealth of experience to the band. Alvin is an well known professional musician who performs solo, with his band, Jahbutu, and provides a range of workshops including the Banana Joe schools program. [More info](www.caribbeanartscompany.com.au) The Rivercity Steel Band Incorporated was formed in 2009 as a not-for-profit community band.

##History of the Steel Pan
The steel band originated in Trinidad. During the days of slavery, musical instruments were scarce. The greed of the slave master had made the arts almost disappear as every available piece of shipping space was used to bring the very profitable human cargo. There were no recreation facilities - slaves working from before sunrise to after sunset had little time to relax and enjoy themselves and life was hard, monotonous and dreary. To take their minds off their unhappy existence, slaves would occasionally gather together and hold a ‘callender’ or ‘camboule’, where they would sing, play sticks and tell stories about happier times. Often they would dance to the rhythm of the simplest of musical instruments such as dustbin lids, bottles, and spoons. The musical Trinidadians made new instruments from any materials available, and bamboo, being in great supply and very quick-growing, became the most popular base material. Bamboo drums led to the Bamboo Tamboo bands, which soon became accepted as an essential part of any carnival. Sadly, these were banned when local police found the Bamboo instruments were doubling as weapons.

##The first Steel Pans
Bamboo Tamboo bands reappeared at the end of the First World War and by about 1930 anything that could make a satisfying noise was used, such as striking the petrol tank of an old car lying nearby. At the end of the war, there were many oil drums left lying on Trinidadian beaches. The local people beat them like a drum producing a rhythmic sound that they could dance to. Hitting the drums produced dents - it was noticed that these dents produced different tones. The legend is that one day a player found that the dented part of an old drum produced a different note. He tried to repair the drum by heating it and beating it with a stone. He found not only that different dents gave different sounds, but also that with care, a single drum could be adapted to create a whole range of notes. Musicians began developing techniques to create new instruments from the rusty drums which had been discarded on their beaches. By the late 1930’s to early 1940’s, the steel drum (or ‘Pan’ as it is now known) was born and remains the only orchestral-scale instrument family to have been invented in the 20th century.

##The Steel Pan grows…
The Steel Pan is made from a 45-gallon oil drum. A process was developed to carefully hammer out notes creating many notes on one drum. It was also noticed that if the bottom was cut out of the drum, the sound was louder. Things quickly progressed with more types of Pans being created covering the full range of frequencies to form a whole orchestra. Larger notes create deeper tones - today there are many different types of Steel Pan. A player's instrument can range from a single pan up to as many as 12 drums! Word of this amazing new find spread very quickly throughout the island, and very soon people were forming bands throughout the country. Everyone wanted to play this magical instrument. In its early years, the Steel Pan was associated with poverty - as a recreational activity for the lower classes of society. Today, the Steel Pan is now officially recognised as the National Instrument of Trinidad and Tobago and has millions of players and followers throughout the world. There is a governing body for the instrument, Pan Trinbago, and the annual national ‘Champions of Steel’ Panorama competition has a prize fund of TT$1,000,000 for the winner. Not so lower class now eh…? Today the Steel Pan is more technical in its manufacture. Although many still choose the traditional method of making the pan by hand by ‘sinking the belly’ with a cannon ball and ‘firing’ it on a normal log fire, they are now more generally made using machinery such as pneumatic hammers and furnaces. Regardless of the technical approach to making pans, it is still a time consuming process, with one pan taking approximately 80 hours to build before final tuning!
